Oslo's public transport is unfriendly to foreigners
Sun, 07 Jul 2024
Travel, Opinion
===================================================

I have been living in Oslo for the past two years and there are
many good things I can say about the city. It is generally clean,
the people will largely not bother you, and it has great access
to many nature areas for recreation. These nature areas are best
reached by the public transport system which is largely excellent.

There are no gates, no complicated ticket types, subscriptions,
and discounts, the metro, bus, and tram drive rather frequently,
and you can even take the ferry with the same card. There are
however also many, many aspects of Oslo's public transport which
rub me the wrong way. Instead of just listing my issues with the
system however, I will highlight specifically why these matters
are particularly detrimental to foreigners.

1. Tickets
----------

Oslo's public transport network does not have ticket machines.
Instead, tickets are can be bought at various kiosks from four
particular chains, or at the half a dozen official outlets. This
is a huge problem for foreigners coming into the city for several
reasons.

Firstly, it is confusing. Ticket machines are rather universal
across Europe and most of the world. My process of visiting
cities is simple. I go to the train or metro stop, buy a day
pass, check out the map, and get on the next available train. In
Oslo, you show up to the metro and see... well nothing. There is
a small sign at most stops describing to you where you can buy
tickets (only in Norwegian and English), though there is no map
nor written instructions of the closest outlet. If you don't know
the city well, you might need to walk around for quite some time
before finding one of these stores.

This leads into my second point. The ticket sale locations are
not distributed uniformly across the city. In fact, you don't
even need to go very far outside of the commercial center before
you are in a ticket-dead-zone. There are many places within the
city where you need to walk at least an hour before encountering
a point of sale, even assuming you take the shortest route.

At this point I should mention that there is an alternative: a
mobile app. While it is great that you *can* use a mobile app
instead of a physical ticket, it does not alleviate the problems
listed above. You cannot assume that your passengers have mobile
data plans to download and use the app (yes, you need an active
internet connection in case of a ticket inspection, and there are
no mobile hotspots on board the vehicles nor at the stations),
you cannot assume that everyone has a smartphone with either
google play or the apple app store, nor for that matter can you
assume that all of your users have a credit card using either
Visa or MasterCard to pay for these tickets. While all these
elements are nigh-universal amongst the Norwegians, they are not
universal worldwide, therefore placing a greater burden on
tourists and other foreigners.

2. Times
--------

The Oslo public transport system is very spotty when it comes to
service after midnight. The metro and tram lines stop entirely
around 1, and the regular buses switch to night buses. These
night buses operate on different lines, with different times,
and are usually overcrowded with drunk Norwegian partygoers.

This is of course especially problematic if you are making your
way to or from the airport, placing yet another increased burden
on tourists.

3. Where am I going again?
--------------------------

All stations and stops for the bus, train, tram, and metro use
recognizable enough Norwegian names. These are rather well
diminishable from another in most cases.

There are however some major accessibility concerns. Firstly, the
displays showing the coming stops are very frequently broken,
especially on the buses. This is a problem because you need to
request the driver to stop at the next station by pressing a
button for both the bus and the tram. If you do not know what the
next stop is (because you are unfamiliar with the city), this
obviously becomes more difficult.

The name of the next stop is also called out by over a speaker,
however this system also has two problems. Firstly, and most
obviously, those who are hard of hearing will have no idea where
they are when the screens are non-functional (or if they also
have poor vision). Secondly, for those not used to the Norwegian
language, it can be very hard to put the sounds to words. Add to
that the fact that there are plenty of people who did not grow up
with the Latin alphabet, nor even a Germanic language, and you
are -- once again -- putting an extra burden on foreigners.

4. Inconsistency and information sharing
----------------------------------------

It happens relatively often that the public transport network
shuts down, most often due to weather conditions. This is perhaps
unavoidable, but what makes this problematic is the sharing of
information in such events.

Firstly, the information is often not updated. Rather, the next
train will just be pushed back 10 minutes with every 10 minutes
that pass. Locals have figured out by experience how to tell when
a train is likely never arriving, but for tourists and
immigrants, this is not the case.

Secondly, smaller stations will usually have a display simply
reading: ``check our website for updates''. I mentioned above
that you cannot assume everyone to be in the possession of a
smartphone and an active internet connection. Bigger stations
tend to have spoken announcements about the state of things,
though these are only given in Norwegian.

And even if you manage to translate these messages, they usually
only state something along the lines of ``look for alternative
transport''. They do not broadcast the number for a taxi company,
they don't tell you how long you should expect to wait, whether
you will be refunded, etcetera. Once again, these are things the
locals have figured out by themselves over the years, and the
companies in charge seem to use this acquired knowledge as a
crutch of sorts, a crutch which falls apart when foreigners come
in to the frame.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

I have many more complaints about the way Norway disadvantages
foreigner workers, tourists, and students, but I will leave
things here for now. A country with the size and wealth of Norway
should be concerned with matters of accessibility in public
transport, and while I by no means believe Norway to be the worst
country in the regard, she too fails to meet the mark of
acceptable accessibility, at least for non-Norwegian passengers.

=================================================================

All of my writing and software projects are available free of
charge under CC-BY unless stated otherwise. I do not accept
monetary donations, but if my work has brought you value I ask
you to donate to a charitable cause or high-impact fund,
organisation, business, institute, or individual driving moral
progress.

For more information about making a moral impact, search for
``giving what we can'', ``give well'', or ``effective altruism''.
